date: 2014-01-21 12:31:27 -0600
categories: journal

# Don't tell me how fast I read

I'm not sure who originated the practice, but when I see "5 min read" or "10
min read" on [Medium][] and elsewhere, my first reaction is **how do you know?**

While I think Medium's huge photo headers and "Next in" footer-based navigation
greatly enhance the presentation of long form essays online, I think estimated
reading times are a feature that need to go the way of social sharing buttons,
blog rolls, and tag clouds.

## Estimated reading times are irrelvant

Reading estimates appear to be a more approachable way to indicate article length
based on word count and the reading speed of the average reader. After all, "5
min read" seems clearer than "1,350 words", doesn't it? I've [written a fair
amount](/books) and word counts still mean nothing to me.

**But neither do estimated reading times.** My decision to read a piece has
never once been informed by how long the site suggests it would take me to read
it. If it looks interesting, I'll start reading. If I run out of time, I'll
[save it for later][add-to-list]. The web already has built-in indicator of
content size -- the scrollbar.

## Estimated reading times assume linear reading

Since reading estimates simply divide the total words by the speed of an
average reader, there's an implied assumption that I'm going to read the entire
piece and not follow hyperlinks to other content. I would hate to see [_actual_
reading times for Wikipedia articles][comic].

## Estimated reading times are insulting

There's an even bigger, more personal reason I don't like reading estimates. I
don't read as fast as I would like. I blame farsightedness, astigmatism, a
wandering mind, and a strong desire to read for comprehension. Sure, how I feel
about my own reading ability is _my_ problem, but I'd bet I'm not the only one
who feels this way. 

Every time I see "5 min read" I read it as "5 min read - you'll probably need 7
or 8." ಠ_ಠ

[Medium]: http://medium.com
[add-to-list]: http://support.apple.com/kb/TI39
[comic]: http://xkcd.com/214/





