date: 2013-02-14 09:32:32 -0600
categories: journal

# How to get great support as a technical user

One of my favorite parts of working at GitHub is helping our Supportocats
answer support requests. Since I focus mainly on the [GitHub API][API], I get
to work with our more technical users. I've shopped at BestBuy enough to know
what it's like when you think you know more than the staff.

Nearly nine months of helping [technoweenie][] pursue Inbox 0 at the API Help
Desk has changed the way I _ask_ for tech support for other products and
services.

## Use the right channel

In the software industry, many of us have friends who have founded or work on
some of our favorite services and tools. With those personal relationships, it
seems easier to shoot an @reply or DM on Twitter. For [site down][status]
questions, that's often good enough, but 140 chars just isn't conducive to
describing (much less troubleshooting) most issues.

For GitHub, [our support form][form] makes it simple to reach out and say
_Halp!_ Sending an email to support@github.com works, too. Including "API" in
the subject line routes you straight to the API team.

Many open source projects have mailing lists, issue trackers, and IRC
rooms to talk about issues. Find the right channel before you send a flurry of
questions to a project maintainer.

## Get to the point

Once your request makes it to the top of the support queue, it has to
be grok'd by a human. Verbosity is your foe here. The more you write, the
longer it takes to distill your words into your actual issue. Not just once,
but each time your ticket is passed to someone else on the team, it has to be
reinterpreted.

## Include details

Your chances of getting speedy help go up substantially if you can avoid that
dreaded "more info please" follow up. Photos, screenshots, URLs, stack traces,
and other facts help speed up [the six stages of debugging][stages]. If you're
calling a HTTP API, the developer has a hard time refuting `curl` output.

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet"><p>`curl -v` or it didn’t happen.</p>&mdash;
Wynn Netherland(@pengwynn) <a
href="https://twitter.com/pengwynn/status/281151555158278145">December 18,
2012</a></blockquote>


## Don't piggyback issues

Many request tools thread messages by subject or ticket number. You might be
tempted to reply to that six month old email because the person who helped you
last time seemed to know what they were talking about. Unless the issue is
directly related, chances are you're delaying your new ticket because there's
more previous conversation to wade through on the other end.

## Don't be insecure

Most support queues use plain old unencrypted email. Please, please, please
_never send passwords, API tokens, credit cards, or other sensitive information
in email_. Always mask or omit sensitive info in email. Be sure to scrub that
stack trace or log snippet you're including, too.

## Be classy

You might have justified rage because a certain feature has been long broken
and no one seems to care. Just don't let frustration undermine your own cause.
Name calling and insults might make you feel better in the moment but it won't
bring you any relief. Most support folks are extremely professional. They like
to help or they wouldn't do what they do.

That said, humans are more inclined to help when they're treated like, well, humans.

Oh yeah, [we're hiring Supportocats][hiring].


[API]: http://developer.github.com
[status]: https://status.github.com
[stages]: http://plasmasturm.org/log/6debug/
[technoweenie]: https://twitter.com/technoweenie
[form]: https://github.com/support
[hiring]: https://jobs.github.com/companies/GitHub
