date: 2014-02-05 08:10:22 -0600
categories: journal
summary: In which I share some of my workday hacks.

# I love the smell of facepalm in the morning

Most of us have a time of day when we're in the groove. If you believe the
stereotype, developers work best late at night, fuelled by caffeine in the soft
glow of a computer screen.

Not me. I'm a morning person. I'm often up at 5AM and in full stride by 7:30. I
think best before noon, as usually evidenced by last night's work.

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" lang="en"><p>Morning me often thinks late
night me is a moron.</p>&mdash; Wynn Netherland (@pengwynn) <a
href="https://twitter.com/pengwynn/statuses/410087033160228864">December 9,
2013</a></blockquote>

Early in my career, I would double down on frustrating bugs. Late nights would
stretch into the wee hours of the morning. In time, I learned that stepping
_away_ from code can be just as productive as stepping _through_ code. Solutions
often seem "obvious" when you return to them after a break. For me, that's
usually the next morning.

Knowing this, I try to employ a few hacks to my workday.

**Create before consuming.** Following a tip from [Jason Rudolph][], I've
started setting aside time each morning for creative work. Starting the morning
with some [writing](/archives) or other thought-intensive work has yielded
better results and put me in a better frame of mind to jump into the tasks of
the day.

**Batch email, issue triage, and mundane tasks during non-peak hours.** Tim
Ferris [helped make "batching" popular][ferris] years ago. I try to tackle the
bulk of my batch processing in the afternoons and reserve my mornings for tasks
that require more focus.

**End the day with a failing test.** Perhaps the biggest thing I've learned to
do is set myself up for the next morning. A failing test can verify a bug or
  describe how a new feature should behave. I don't have to have the
  implementation or the impact to the rest of the codebase figured out before I
  walk away. I can tackle those bigger questions the next day, when I'm fresh.

[Jason Rudolph]: https://twitter.com/jasonrudolph
[ferris]: http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/2007/03/22/how-to-check-e-mail-twice-a-day-or-once-every-10-days/


