date: 2013-04-15 08:14:06 -0500
categories: journal
summary: Bigger blocks of focused time results in more ships.

# Shipping and the art of Getting *Thing* Done

**tldr;** *Bigger blocks of focused time results in [more ships][ships].*

My career began in a cube farm over fifteen years ago. It seemed everyone at
that time had a Franklin Planner and could enumerate their [big rocks][] for
the week on commmand. These were those high priority tasks that just had to get
done. The analogy held that if you were filling a jar, you'd put the big rocks
in before the smaller pebbles and sand.

Some years later, as [*Getting Things Done*][gtd] reached near cult status, we
sought not only to prioritize tasks, but squeeze out every bit of productivity
from the rest of our schedules by assigning a `@context` to all the pebbles and
sand. The thinking was, if you've got just five minutes before the next status
meeting, you check your pre-categorized task list to see what phone call,
email, or airline reservation you could get done.

When applied within the constraints of typical corporate culture, both of these
philosophies aim to bring efficiency to a system under internal pressure from
excess meetings and a fixed workday.

## Flex and defrag your schedule

It's well known that at GitHub we have few meetings. [Tom][tom] and
[others][atwood] have written about how meetings kill productivity. I saw one
of the best analogies for this just last week [on Twitter][write-lock]:

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet"><p>"a meeting is essentially a write lock for your organization" @<a href="https://twitter.com/littleidea">littleidea</a> love that analogy <a href="https://twitter.com/search/%23hangops">#hangops</a></p>&mdash; kate matsudaira (@katemats) <a href="https://twitter.com/katemats/status/322773552921186304">April 12, 2013</a></blockquote>

While much has been written about the death of productivity _in_ a meeting, we
often overlook what pressures fixed blocks of time put on the rest of our
schedules. It's not really even about meetings as much as it is about *all
fixed blocks of time.* Meetings and appointments definitely qualify, but so do
fixed workday boundaries. I'm a morning person and will often start my workday
way earlier than my teammates. Some Hubbers are night owls and their workday
doesn't really get going until I'm headed to bed. A flexible work schedule
means each person can maximize their schedule for long uninterrupted blocks of
time.

As my schedule fills up, what happens before each block of scheduled time? No
matter how good I get at multi-tasking, **that important thing gets pushed out
because I don't have time to fully context shift and work on it effectively**
in the time available.  The more fixed items I have on my sechedule, the harder
it is to jump into a large task.

Meetings especially have some rather insidious effects. **For programmers,
not all time is created equal.** There's something about communicating with others,
especially verbally, that drains your mental energy. Have you ever paired with
another developer for an extended period of time? Compare your mental state
after a four hour solo hacking session to just two hours of pairing. If you're
like me, pairing is rewarding yet very draining.

Meetings work the same way. That block of time _after_ the meeting isn't
prime time for getting much done. There's no way to avoid meetings and
appointments, but the fewer you have, the larger focused blocks of time you
have.

## Real focus - what are you shipping _next?_

Time pressures aren't the only thing that can fragment your schedule and impact
your productivity. Too many priorities lead to a divided mind and fewer ships.
Every month, someone from each GitHub team will create an issue along the lines
of "What do you want to ship in April?" along with a short list of their goals
for that month. Everyone from the team piles on with their lists so everyone
  gets a sense of what everyone else is doing.

What makes GitHub culture unique from everywhere else I've worked, though, is
the emphasis on **what are you shipping next?** Everyone has the
freedom to choose what they're working on inside the framework of the company's
goals. **Everyone also has the freedom to work on that next thing until it's
done.**


[big rocks]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/First_Things_First_(book)
[gtd]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Getting_Things_Done
[tom]: http://tom.preston-werner.com/2010/10/18/optimize-for-happiness.html
[atwood]: http://www.codinghorror.com/blog/2012/02/meetings-where-work-goes-to-die.html
[write-lock]: https://twitter.com/katemats/status/322773552921186304
[ships]: https://github.com/blog/category/ship
