date: 2014-02-11 07:30:17 -0600
categories: journal
summary: Here are some ways teams can deal with blockers.

# Unsticking someone else is shipping, too

_I jotted down the title for this post a few weeks ago. I was looking for
the right way to express the idea when last week life helped out._

---

Texas drivers don't handle frozen roads too well. It had been snowing lightly
for a few hours when I went to pick up my daughter from school. There were
patches of ice, but overall, the roads weren't that bad.

The trickiest spot getting out of our neighborhood during such conditions is
usually an all-way stop at the top of a small hill. Since traffic is usually
light, drivers often run the intersection instead of attempting to gain the
hill from a cold start on the slick road.

As I came to the intersection that day, I saw two vehicles nose-to-nose on the
side of the road to the left. I slowed and approached cautiously since
visibility was limited.  Suddenly, a young man stepped out from between the
cars, forcing me to stop abruptly to avoid him. He had been securing a tow
strap to the bumper of a stranded car and had stepped back into my lane, not
seeing me.  The driver of the other vehicle was about to attempt to pull the
car to higher ground with his 4x4.

Silently cheering them on, I waited  and watched the car get on its way. I then
set out to continue my journey only to realize I, too, was immobile.

The young man, still holding the free end of the tow strap, simply raised it
and shouted over to me, "Need a hand?"

After they pulled me to level ground, I walked over to thank them. The driver
said he was returning from checking on his elderly mother but had gotten
drafted into his current service. **I'm sure it wasn't the afternoon he had
planned, but I suspect he made a bigger impact this way.**

---

## "Any blockers?"

That question is the heart of the standup. Getting together synchronously isn't
as much about gauging status or making strategic decisions as it is removing
blockers. While incomplete depedencies can block us, all too often we get stuck
on unanswered questions or baffling bugs.

Here are some ways teams can deal with blockers.

**Look out for others, offer to help.** Watch out for teammates that have gone
quiet. Pick up on frustration in the chat room or wherever your team gathers.
Sometimes you just need to look up and say "Need a hand?"

**Ask for help.** If you're stuck, don't be afraid take the problem to the
team. Chances are, someone else has faced the same issue.

**Share grizzled experience.** Good developers are rarely smarter, they've just
found more wrong ways to do something. Redeem your mistakes and help someone
else out of the same pit.

**Document solutions.** Don't leave those that come behind you (or future you)
own their own. Look for ways to publish what you've learned in getting
unblocked.  This can be a new paragraph in the project docs, a wiki entry, a
detailed commit message, or simply linking issues across projects.

**Drop domain knowledge.** We all can't be experts in everything. There are
areas in which we have a deeper grasp than our teammates. Providing the right
context for a teammate working outside their normal area can be invaluable.

**Give sign off.** Who is waiting on you? Give weight to completed pull requests
and other items where a quick :+1: would keep someone else moving.




